✨ Initialize the Grafana plugin (#2718)
kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder: docs/book/src/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha.md

- Access to [Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/). Make sure you have:
  - [Dashboard edit permission](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/next/administration/roles-and-permissions/#dashboard-permissions)
  - Prometheus Data source
    ![pre](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/176119794-f6d69b0b-93f0-4f9e-a53c-daf9f77dadae.gif)

<aside class="note">

Check the [metrics][reference-metrics-doc] to know how to enable the metrics for your projects scaffold with Kubebuilder.

See that in the [config/prometheus][kustomize-plugin] you will find the ServiceMonitor to enable the metrics in the default endpoint `/metrics`.

</aside>

### Basic Usage

The Grafana plugin is attached to the `init` subcommand and the `edit` subcommand:

```sh
# Initialize a new project with grafana plugin
kubebuilder init --plugins grafana.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha

# Enable grafana plugin to an existing project
kubebuilder edit --plugins grafana.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha
```

The plugin will create a new directory and scaffold the JSON files under it (i.e. `grafana/controller-runtime-metrics.json`).

> #### Grafana Manifest Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Now, let's check how to use the Grafana Dashboards
```

1. Copy the JSON file
2. Visit `<your-grafana-url>/dashboard/import` to [import a new dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/export-import/#import-dashboard).
3. Paste the JSON content to `Import via panel json`, then press `Load` button
   <img width="644" alt="Screen Shot 2022-06-28 at 3 40 22 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/176121955-1c4aec9c-0ba4-4271-9767-e8d1726d9d9a.png">
4. Select the data source for Prometheus metrics
   <img width="633" alt="Screen Shot 2022-06-28 at 3 41 26 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/176122261-e3eab5b0-9fc4-45fc-a68c-d9ce1cfe96ee.png">

> 5. Once `import` the json, the dashboard is ready.

Reviewer 2: Nit 
```suggestion
5. Once the json is imported in grafana, the dashboard is ready.
```

> #### Show case:
> 
> ![output](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/175382307-9a6c3b8b-6cc7-4339-b221-2539d0fec042.gif)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

The plugin will create a new directory and scaffold the JSON files under it (i.e. `grafana/controller-runtime-metrics.json`).
Then, you can use the JSON manifests on Grafana by importing them to create your Dashboards.

![output](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/174394375-fae3abca-f376-46e8-8d1b-d7704305fd6a.gif)

## Subcommands

The Grafana plugin implements the following subcommands:

- init (`$ kubebuilder init [OPTIONS]`)

## Affected files

The following scaffolds will be created or updated by this plugin:

- `grafana/*.json`

## Further resources

- Refer to a sample of `servicemonitor` provided by [kustomize plugin][kustomize-plugin]
- Check the [plugin implementation][plugin-implementation]
- [Grafana Docs][grafana-docs] of importing JSON file
- The usage of servicemonitor by [Prometheus Operator][servicemonitor]

[controller-metrics]: https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/metrics-reference.html
[controller-runtime]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime
[grafana]: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/next/
[grafana-docs]: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/export-import/#import-dashboard

> [kustomize-plugin]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v3-with-kustomize-v2/config/prometheus/monitor.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[kustomize-plugin]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v3/config/prometheus/monitor.yaml
```

Reviewer: Let's keep the link for the default scaffold done with the CLI

> # Grafana Plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Grafana Plugin (`grafana/v1-alpha`)
```

> The Grafana plugin provides the Grafana manifest that you can use to visualize your operator status easily.

Reviewer: wdyt about we make a little bit more clear
```suggestion
The Grafana plugin is an Optional plugin that can be used to scaffold Grafana Dashboards to allow you to check out the default metrics which are exported by projects using [controller-runtime][controller-runtime]
```
we need to add the alias at the bottom.

<aside class="note">
<h1>Examples</h1>

> Samples are provided under the [testdata][testdata] directory of the Kubebuilder project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Let's try to be a little less verbose

> You can check samples using this plugin by looking at the `project-v3-with-grafana` projects under the [testdata][testdata] directory on the root directory of the Kubebuilder project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check its default scaffold by looking at the `project-v3-with-grafana` projects under the [testdata][testdata] directory on the root directory of the Kubebuilder project.
```

</aside>

## When to use it ?

> - If you want to observe your operator runtime status based on the [controller metrics][controller-metrics] collected by Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If you are looking to observe the metrics exported by [controller metrics][controller-metrics] and collected by Prometheus via [Grafana][]
```

## How to use it ?

### Prerequisites:

> 1. Prometheus monitoring stacks running in your K8s cluster (e.g: [Prometheus Operator][prom-operator], [kube-prometheus][kube-prometheus])
> 2. A servicemonitor that exposes your operator metrics to Prometheus
>    - If you're using the kustomize plugin in the meantime, you should have the manifest under `config/prometheus`
> 3. Users must have write access to their grafana services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to [Prometheus][prometheus]  
- Your project must be using [controller-runtime][controller-runtime] to expose the metrics via the [controller metrics][controller-metrics] and they need to be collected by Prometheus. For further information check the [metrics][reference-metrics-doc]  

See the documentation [metrics][metrics-doc] to know how to enable the metrics to be collected by Prometheus in your projects.  

2. A servicemonitor that exposes your operator metrics to Prometheus
   - If you're using the kustomize plugin in the meantime, you should have the manifest under `config/prometheus`
3. Users must have write access to their grafana services
```

> ### Sample of servicemonitor

Reviewer: The service monitor is a pre-requirement for we are able to export the metrics to Prometheus Operator right?
So, if the person installed the Prometheus Operator as suggested in the doc will have the ServiceMonitor scaffold in the config and be able to use it. So, I think we should not add this example here.

```yaml
---
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: jaeger-operator-servicemonitor
  namespace: observability
  labels:
    app: jaeger-operator
    release: prometheus
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: jaeger-operator # target service
  endpoints:
    - path: /metrics
      port: https
      scheme: https
      bearerTokenFile: /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token
      tlsConfig:
        insecureSkipVerify: true
```

### Basic Usage

> The Grafana plugin is attached to the `init` subcommand:
> 
> ```sh
> kubebuilder init --plugins grafana.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Grafana plugin is attached to the `init` subcommand:

```sh
If you will scaffold a new project you can use the Grafana plugin via the flag `--plugins=grafana.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha` so that you will have the default scaffold with what is done by this plugin. 

However, for pre-existent projects, you can also enable this plugin by running `kubebuilder edit --plugins=grafana.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha` 
```

> Once triggered, there will be a `grafana/controller-overall.json` file scaffolded out.
> This json file utilizes [controller-runtime][controller-runtime] default metrics to display your operator runtime status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin will create a new directory and scaffold the JSON files under it (i.e. `grafana/controller-runtime-metrics.json`). Then, you can use the JSON manifests on Grafana by importing them to create your Dashboards.
```

Can we change the name of the json to be more what it does?

> 

Reviewer: WDYT:

```suggestion
![output](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18136486/174394375-fae3abca-f376-46e8-8d1b-d7704305fd6a.gif)
```

> Bascially, you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Grafana Dashabords:

### Manager Memory and CPU usage (`grafana/manager_memory_cpu.json`)

//Todo: Do we not have the memory and CPU exported also by default from the manager? 
// Can we add a /todo here and create this report in the follow-up? Why ? I think that will be a metric more useful
// then these ones are exported by controller runtime

// also add an image here 

### Controller-Runtime Metrics (`grafana/controller-runtime-metrics.json`)

The `controller-runtime-metrics.json` will create a Grafana dashboard to check all metrics `[controller_runtime_*][metrics-ref-doc]` exported by default, see: 

//todo: add here an image with the final result

```

1. Copy this JSON file
2. Create a new dashboard in your Grafana Web UI
3. In the setting page of the dashboard, paste the content to its JSON model

> 4. Save the model, and there should be a newly created dashboard `Kubebuiler-Grafana-Plugin`

Reviewer: I think we do no need these steps here because we explaining above

## Subcommands

The Grafana plugin implements the following subcommands:

> - init (`$ kubebuilder init [OPTIONS]`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- edit (`$ kubebuilder init [OPTIONS]`)
- init (`$ kubebuilder init [OPTIONS]`)
```

Reviewer: Could we add the edit? TO do so we just need to add a new edit.go in the plugin that does exactly the same scaffold and steps done by the init.
